---
permalink: 'argentina/market-challenges.html'
published: true
layout: default
---
The primary market challenges arise from slowing economic growth, and foreign exchange and import restrictions. The outlook for the Argentine economy is uncertain in 2013 due to various factors including lower commodity prices (expected to trend somewhat downward from the historic highs of recent cycles) and economic disruptions caused by foreign exchange and import restrictions the Government of Argentina (GOA) imposed in late 2011 and early 2012. GDP growth slowed markedly in 2012 to 1.9 percent from 8.9 percent in 2011; according to official statistics (the IMF and some private analysts believe the official statistics may overstate growth). Strong commodity prices and automobile exports to Brazil have contributed to Argentina’s rapid growth over the past several years. Non-automatic import licenses (NAILs) were ended late last year for all but a few products, but a regime erected by the GOA in February 2012 that requires all importers to request approval from the Argentine Tax and Customs Authority (AFIP) prior to making each purchase for imports is still in effect and constitutes import licensing in all but name. This system is a subject of a WTO complaint by the U.S. and other countries against Argentina. Moreover, the GOA’s policy of tying the percentage of import application approvals to changes in the trade balance and foreign exchange levels has added to the uncertainty.

Sustained inflation generally estimated at 25+ percent has raised the unit labor costs and resulted in a more challenging business environment, especially as the real effective exchange rate has appreciated. Limits on profit remittances have also discouraged new investment in Argentina. Lack of transparency and a public comment period for new regulations adds to business uncertainty, as does the lack of a credible national statistics agency. As a result of the aforementioned government policies, many local and international firms based in Argentina have put a hold on plans for expansion or the adoption of new product lines until the economic climate and regulatory regime become more clear, consistent and predictable.
