---
permalink: 'argentina/market-overview.html'
published: true
layout: default
---
Welcome to Argentina! The U.S. and Argentina share a long history of bilateral commercial relations both in trade and investment. The United States is Argentina’s third-largest trading partner and U.S. companies are among the top investors with some U.S. companies maintaining local sales and manufacturing subsidiaries in the country for over a century. Argentina is an important regional export market for the United States, with a population of 42 million people – the second-largest economy in South America and the fourth most populous country in Latin America.

The United States and Argentina share a mutually beneficial trade relationship with total bilateral trade in goods and services nearing $23 billion dollars in 2012. The U.S. supplies raw materials, intermediate goods, and capital goods to feed Argentina’s industrial sector while Argentina exports food, agricultural products, and intermediate goods to the U.S. The U.S. enjoys a trade surplus with Argentina; approximately 90 percent of its exports to Argentina are destined for local industry and agriculture such as computers, industrial and agricultural chemicals, agricultural and transportation equipment, machine tools, parts for oil field rigs, and refined fuel oil. Argentine exports to the U.S., meanwhile include goods such as wine— Argentina is one of the largest exporters of wine to the U.S.—fruit juices, crude oil, and intermediate goods such seamless pipe, tubes, and other iron and steel products.

U.S. investment makes a large contribution to Argentina’s economy. Over 500 U.S.-based companies currently operate in Argentina, employing over 155,000 Argentines. The stock of U.S. investment in Argentina reached $13.3 billion in 2011 (latest data available) and is concentrated in the energy, manufacturing, information technology, and financial sectors. U.S. firms operating in Argentina continue to make a positive impact on the Argentine economy and society and are widely respected for their corporate governance, the quality of the work environment they provide to their Argentine employees, their transparency, and their work in corporate social responsibility. In 2012, U.S. companies comprised nearly 1/3 of the 100 most respected companies in Argentina published annually by Argentina’s largest newspaper, _Clarin_.
