---
permalink: 'argentina/using-an-agent-or-distributor.html'
published: true
layout: default
---
International companies typically market their products through an Argentine agent/representative or a distributor. Working with a distributor has several advantages. Distributors can provide strategic support for positioning brands in the market through promotion and advertising. Furthermore, they understand the local culture and can assist with after-sales service. This value-added service is increasingly important for customers and contributes to a positive image of U.S. firms doing business abroad. Due to import restrictions there are situations in which the best solution is a representative. To discuss this further, please [contact us](http://export.gov/argentina/contactus/index.asp).

The Civil and Commercial Codes govern principal-agent relations and differ from U.S. laws. We strongly recommend that an Argentine lawyer be consulted prior to entering into any type of agreement with an agent/distributor and engaged prior to substantive negotiation of the agreement terms. No special legislation has been enacted to regulate the cancellation of agency/distribution agreements, although a company could incur additional costs associated with the cancellation of an agency agreement under Argentine labor law. Given the complexity of the legal and commercial environment, contracts are generally negotiated in writing through the exchange of reversal letters or via a basic instrument. The parties may not elect foreign laws to govern the agreement. Argentine courts will not enforce a contract executed abroad to avoid Argentina law.

U.S. companies should take time in selecting their Argentine agent/distributor. Business relationships and a good reputation are essential to an agent/distributor’s ability to reach potential customers of your product or service. The mutual trust that this builds will help prevent business disputes and help resolve them amicably when they do arise. The U.S. Commercial Service of the U.S. Department of Commerce assists exporters in finding and evaluating partners in Argentina.

Contact the nearest U.S. Department of Commerce Export Assistance Center, where trade specialists can provide you with guidance on entering the Argentine or other international markets. Please call 1-800-USA-TRADE (1-800-872-8723) to locate the one nearest you or visit the U.S. Government Export Portal at [http://export.gov/eac/](http://export.gov/eac/). You may also contact us at the U.S. Commercial Service in Buenos Aires directly for additional information on partner search services, applicable fees and delivery times.
