---
permalink: 'argentina/non-tariff-barriers.html'
published: true
layout: default
---
As of February 1, 2012, prior approval from the AFIP is required for all imports. Applications are submitted via the AFIP online system “MARIA” which is accessible to Customs Brokers through the submission of a Sworn Affidavit of Intent to Import (DJAI). Approval times and criteria applied to determine if permission is granted to import are unpredictable and exporters are advised to ensure that Argentine clients have an approved DJAI as well as permission from AFIP to purchase the foreign exchange necessary to pay for goods prior to shipping. Moreover, certain types of goods may only be imported into Argentina with a permit from the pertinent authority. In addition, government officials have used phytosanitary rules, safeguard measures involving specific duties, anti-dumping investigations, and other practices to inhibit imports and protect domestic industry. Argentina continues to delay issuance of health certificates that would allow the resumption of exports of poultry meat and products from the United States. It imposes a number of trade restrictions, including safeguard provisions on Brazilian color televisions and anti-dumping duties on imports of U.S. polyvinyl chloride.
 
Prior government approval is required for imports of sensitive goods such as pharmaceuticals, foodstuffs, insecticides, veterinary products, medical devices, defense materials, cosmetics and toiletries, and other products. Many such products are subject to registration and presentation of a sanitary certificate issued by a competent authority in the exporting country, or other requisites to protect human, animal or plant health. Certain types of special vehicles, publications, shoes, carpets, paper and automobiles to be used as prototypes require prior government approval to be imported into Argentina.

Many food-related and agricultural imports, such as livestock, plants, bulbs, cuttings, rhizomes, roots, grains, and plant products require a sanitary certificate issued by a competent authority in the exporting country. Products destined for human consumption must fulfill certain specifications and be labeled and packed accordingly.
