---
permalink: 'panama/investment-climate-in-panama-bilateral-investment-agreements.html'
published: true
layout: default
---
Panama has bilateral investment agreements with the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Switzerland, Germany, Taiwan Canada, Argentina, Spain, Chile, Uruguay, the Czech Republic, Netherlands, Cuba, Mexico, Dominican Republic, Korea, Ukraine, Sweden, Qatar, Finland, and Italy. Commerce Ministry officials have said that there have been some exploratory talks toward investment agreements with other countries, but they acknowledge that these discussions have a lower priority than ongoing free trade negotiations. The U.S.-Panama Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) entered into force in 1991 with additional amendments in 2001 to reflect Panama's joining the International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID).

The BIT and the TPA further the U.S. investment policy by establishing rules to protect investors from a Party against wrongful or discriminatory government actions when they invest or attempt to invest in the other Party’s territory, and by providing a mechanism for an investor of a Party to submit to binding international arbitration a claim for damages against the other Party. The BIT and TPA commitments draw from U.S. legal principles and practices to provide U.S. investors in Panama many of the substantive and procedural protections that foreign investors currently enjoy under the U.S. legal system. They use traditional standards incorporated in earlier U.S. bilateral investment treaties, previous trade agreements, and customary international law to improve transparency, reduce barriers to investment, and improve the dispute settlement process, which will address key concerns about the investment climate in Panama.

All forms of investment will be protected under the BIT and TPA, including enterprises, debt, concessions and similar contracts, and intellectual property. With very few exceptions, U.S. investors will be treated as well as Panamanian investors (or investors of any other country) in the establishment, acquisition, and operation of investments in Panama. The investor protections are backed by a transparent, binding international arbitration mechanism, under which investors may, at their own initiative, bring claims against a government for an alleged breach of the TPA’s investment chapter. Submissions to investor-state arbitral tribunals would be made public, and hearings would generally be open to the public. Tribunals would also be authorized to accept amicus submissions from non-disputing parties.

Once in force, the TPA will suspend the BIT, but preserves for ten years the option of invoking dispute settlement under the BIT with respect to investments covered by the Treaty as of the date of entry into force of the Agreement, in the case of disputes that arose prior to the date of entry into force of the Agreement, and for disputes arising on or after the date of entry into force of the Agreement out of an investment agreement that was in effect before the date of entry into force of the Agreement.
