---
permalink: 'panama/trade-agreements.html'
published: true
layout: default
---
Panama has full FTAs in force with (including date of entry into force): El Salvador (2003), Taiwan (2004), Singapore (2006), Chile (2008), Costa Rica (2009), Honduras (2009), Guatemala (2009), Nicaragua (2010), and Peru (2012). Panama has partial FTAs with Mexico (1985), Dominican Republic (1987), and Cuba (2009). It has completed negotiations on two more agreements: Canada (signed in 2010 and passed by the Panamanian National Assembly in 2010) and the European Union (signed in 2010).

On June 28, 2007, the United States and Panama signed the United States-Panama Trade Promotion Agreement (TPA). Panama approved the TPA on July 11, 2007. The US Congress approved implementing legislation on October 12, 2011, and President Obama signed it on October 21, 2011. Presidents Obama and Martinelli have agreed to implement the TPA as quickly as possible, but no date has been set for it to enter into force. When the TPA enters into force, it will result in significant liberalization of trade in goods and services, including financial services. The TPA also includes important disciplines relating to customs administration and trade facilitation, technical barriers to trade, government procurement, investment, telecommunications, electronic commerce, intellectual property rights, and labor and environmental protection. Under the TPA, U.S. firms will have better access to Panama’s services sector than Panama provides to other WTO Members under the General Agreement on Trade in Services. All services sectors are covered under the TPA except where Panama has made specific exceptions. Moreover, Panama agreed to become a full participant in the WTO Information Technology Agreement. Panama has also entered into a bilateral agreement with the United States that resolved a number of regulatory barriers to trade in agricultural goods ranging from meat and poultry to processed products, including dairy and rice.

Panama is a beneficiary of the Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery Act, better known as the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI), which provides for one-way free trade access for specific Panamanian exports to the U.S.

Panama has bilateral investment agreements with the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Switzerland, Germany, Taiwan, Canada, Argentina, Spain, Chile, Uruguay, the Czech Republic, Netherlands, Cuba, Mexico, Dominican Republic, Korea Ukraine, Sweden, Qatar, Finland, and Italy. The U.S.-Panama Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) entered into force in 1991 (with additional amendments in 2001 to reflect Panama's joining the International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID). Once in force, the investor protection provisions in the TPA will supplant those in the BIT. Nevertheless, the TPA preserves for ten years the option for investors to invoke dispute settlement under the BIT with respect to investments covered by the Treaty as of the date of entry into force of the TPA, in the case of disputes that arose prior to the date of entry into force of the TPA, and for disputes arising on or after the date of entry into force of the TPA out of an investment agreement that was in effect before the date of entry into force of the TPA.
