---
permalink: 'panama/investment-climate-in-panama-labor.html'
published: true
layout: default
---
A frequent concern for American businesses in Panama is the labor code, specifically the cost and time of training or laying off or firing an employee. Panama's non-agriculture labor force is approximately 1.5 million with 4.5% unemployment as of August 2011. Approximately 41% are employed in the informal sector, with a lower rate of informal employment in Panama capital area (37%) compared to indigenous areas (80%). While the GOP has periodically revised its labor code, including a modest revision in 1995, it remains highly restrictive. Several sectors, including the Panama Canal Authority, the Colon Free Zone, and export processing zones/call centers are covered by their own labor regimes. Employers outside of these areas, such as the tourism sector, have called for greater flexibility, easier termination of workers, and the elimination of many constraints on productivity-based pay. Employers frequently cite the lack of skilled labor as a constraint to growth. The GOP has issued waivers to the regulations on an ad hoc basis in order to address employers’ needs, but there is no consistent standard for obtaining such a waiver.

Despite spending approximately 16% of the central government budget and 4.1% of GDP on education, approximately half of the students fail their university entrance exam. The September 2011 World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report ranked Panama 133 out of 142 countries for quality of education. This poor showing underscored the 2010 OECD Program for International Student Achievement (PISA) analysis, which ranked Panama second worst among participating Latin American countries. The lack of skilled labor is of serious concern to both Panamanian and foreign investors. The problem with the lack of skilled Panamanian labor is compounded by the Panamanian law that mandates 90% of an employer’s staff must be Panamanian. A recent study claimed that 80% of Panama’s management positions are held by non-Panamanians or Panamanians who studied outside of Panama.

According to the World Bank’s Doing Business 2010 Report, Panama’s “Employing Workers” rank was 177 out of 183 based on difficulties in hiring and firing workers. Panamanian labor law, in requiring the Labor Ministry's permission to dismiss employees for “economic reasons,” may act as a legal barrier to a firm wishing to reduce its workforce or repatriate its capital. If a firm is insolvent, the law also gives workers priority over all other non-secured creditors. The monthly minimum wage varies based on the region of Panama and the industry; the range is between $432 and $490.
