---
permalink: 'panama/investment-climate-in-panama-openness-to-foreign-investment.html'
published: true
layout: default
---
The GOP maintains a liberal regime for foreign investment and investment in financial instruments while, with cooperation from the Panamanian business community, actively encouraging foreign direct investment (FDI). Panama became the fifth country in Latin America to obtain investment grade rating for its sovereign debt in spring 2010, indicating that the three major credit rating agencies have confidence that the Government of Panama has the willingness and ability to manage its debt obligations. With few exceptions, Panamanian law makes no distinction between domestic and foreign companies.

International indexes generally rate Panama as one of the best countries in Latin America for business and investment. Key Panamanian strengths are considered to be cross border trading and access to finance. Weaknesses are poor rule of law, lack of judicial independence, a shortage of skilled workers, corruption, and poorly staffed government institutions that are susceptible to influence. The U.S. Government has received numerous reports of fraud and corruption in connection with titles to property purchased by U.S. persons. In addition, some of Panama’s largest U.S. investors have complained about inconsistent treatment of their concessions and nontransparent government procurements.

In 1998, the GOP enacted the Investment Stability Law, which, among other things, guarantees foreign investors who invest at least two million dollars in Panama, equal treatment under the law to that given to their domestic competition. Under Law 41 (2007), Panama encourages multinational companies to open regional headquarters in Panama by offering various tax incentives. 63 international companies have been established under this law as of January 1, 2012.

On June 28, 2007, the United States and Panama signed the United States – Panama Trade Promotion Agreement (TPA). Panama approved the TPA on July 11, 2007. The US Congress approved implementing legislation on October 12, 2011, and President Obama signed it on October 21, 2011. Presidents Obama and Martinelli have agreed to implement the TPA as quickly as possible, but no date has been set for it to enter into force.

The TPA is a comprehensive free trade agreement. When the TPA enters into force, it will result in significant liberalization of trade in goods and services, including financial services. The TPA also includes important disciplines relating to customs administration and trade facilitation, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, technical barriers to trade, government procurement, investment, telecommunications, electronic commerce, intellectual property rights, and labor and environmental protection.

Under the TPA, U.S. firms will have better access to Panama’s services sector than Panama provides to other WTO Members under the General Agreement on Trade in Services. All services sectors are covered under the TPA, except where Panama has made specific exceptions. Panama agreed to provide improved access in sectors like express delivery, and to grant new access in certain professional services that previously had been reserved exclusively for Panamanian nationals. Moreover, Panama agreed to become a full participant in the WTO Information Technology Agreement. Panama is unique in Latin America in that it is predominantly a services-based economy. Services represent about 80 percent of Panama’s GDP.

The office of Panama’s Vice Minister of International Commerce within the Ministry of Commerce and Industry is the principal entity responsible for promoting foreign investment and exports. Through [Proinvex](http://proinvex.mici.gob.pa), it provides investors with information, expedites specific projects, leads investment-seeking missions abroad, and supports foreign investment missions to Panama. However, depending on the character of the planned investment, multiple governmental entities may have a passive or active interest in the investment in terms of ensuring that its parameters of operation are consistent with relevant regulations and requirements for land use, employment, special investment incentives, and business licensing. There is no formal investment screening by the GOP, although the government does monitor large foreign investments.

The GOP does impose some limitations on foreign ownership, such as in the retail and media sectors where ownership must be Panamanian. Foreign retailers, however, have been able to work within the confines of Panamanian law primarily through franchise arrangements. Once the TPA comes into force, U.S. ownership of consumer retail will be allowed. Currently, the exercise of approximately 55 professions is reserved for Panamanian nationals only. In particular, medical practitioners, lawyers, accountants, and custom brokers are occupations currently reserved for Panamanian citizens. The GOP also requires foreigners in various sectors to obtain explicit permission to work. However, the Embassy has not received reports of such restrictions hindering U.S. firms operating in Panama.

The United States – Panama Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) entered into force in 1991 with additional amendments in 2001. The BIT ensures that, with some exceptions, U.S. investors receive fair, equitable, and nondiscriminatory treatment, and that both Parties abide by international law standards, such as for expropriation and compensation and free transfers. Once in force, the investor protection provisions in the TPA will supplant those in the BIT. Nevertheless, the BIT preserves for ten years the option for investors to invoke dispute settlement under the BIT with respect to investments covered by the Treaty as of the date of entry into force of the TPA, in the case of disputes that arose prior to the date of entry into force of the TPA, and for disputes arising on or after the date of entry into force of the TPA out of an investment agreement that was in effect before the date of entry into force of the TPA.

The U.S. Government has received numerous property dispute complaints from U.S. investors and individual property holders. The complaints include broken contracts, demands for extra payments, fraud perpetrated by organized crime rings, corruption, and occasional threats of violence. In some cases, these disputes resulted in the loss of the property. Many of these complaints appear to stem from the general lack of titled land in Panama, along with inadequate government administration of the property system and a weak judiciary. The majority of land in Panama - and almost all land outside of Panama City - is not titled; a system of rights of possession exists, but the Embassy is aware of multiple instances where such rights have been successfully challenged. The World Bank’s Doing Business 2012 report notes that Panama has slipped from 113 to 120 out of 183 countries on the Registering Property measure – and remains at 119 for the Enforcing Contracts measure.

The judicial system’s capacity to resolve contractual and property disputes is weak and open to corruption, as illustrated by the most recent World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report, which rates Panama’s judicial independence as ranking 133 out of 142 countries. Americans should exercise greater due diligence in purchasing Panamanian real estate than they would in purchasing real estate in the United States. Engaging a reputable attorney and licensed real estate broker is strongly recommended, as is including the option for mediation in any contract. Please [contact us](mailto:daniel.crocker@trade.gov?subject=Real%20Estate%20Attorneys%20in%20Panama) for a list of qualified professionals in both areas.

Panama enacted Law 80 (2009) which attempts to address the lack of titled land in certain parts of the country; however, it does not cure deficiencies in government administration or the judicial system. In 2010, the National Assembly approved the creation of the National Authority of Land Management (ANATI) to administer land titling; however, decisions taken by ANATI have reinforced investors’ concerns regarding government administration, corruption, and the ability of the judicial system to resolve these issues.

Panama's privatization framework law does not distinguish between foreign and domestic investor participation in prospective privatizations. The law calls for prescreening of potential investors or bidders in certain cases to establish technical viability, but nationality and Panamanian participation are not criteria. The Government of Panama privatized many entities starting in the mid-1990s, but there has not been a privatization in several years. There were press reports of the water authority, convention center, and some functions of the public health system being privatized, but the current government has not indicated a desire to proceed with these or any other privatizations.
 
Panama has attracted more than one billion dollars per year in Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) since 2006, and for the third time in the past six years has broken the $2 billion dollar mark in FDI, having received $2.1 million in the first nine months of 2011, $205 million more than the same period in 2010. FDI was over 10% of GDP from 2006-2008, although FDI subsequently fell slightly as a percentage of GDP, anecdotally related to the world economic downturn. FDI levels have been driven by investments in the Colon Free Zone, logistics, energy, financial, maritime, construction and transportation sectors.

The Panama Canal Authority started a seven year, $5.25 billion expansion project of the Panama Canal in September 2007. The project entails the building of a third, much larger set of locks, the deepening of Lake Gatun, and deeper dredging of channels. All major contracts have been awarded, but there are opportunities to supply goods and services to the principal contractors. The Panama Canal Authority also procures approximately $250 million in goods and services annually for its daily operations and maintenance. Foreign companies can bid on such contracts under the same terms and conditions as Panamanian companies.

The Government of Panama has ambitious infrastructure investment plans that could run up to $15 billion in the next five years. As part of this effort, the Government of Panama started the process to construct a $1.5-2 billion metro line. The requirements for the project were publicized in early 2010, and an initial line is planned to be completed before the May 2014 elections.

Panamanian Law 22 of 2006, as amended by Law 48 of 2011, among others, regulates government procurement and other related issues. Law 22 was intended to streamline and modernize Panama’s contracting system. It requires publication of all proposed government purchases.

Law 22 also established [PanamaCompra](http://www.panamacompra.gob.pa), an Internet-based procurement system through which the Government of Panama evaluates proposals and monitors the procurement process and holds consultations for public bids, including technical specifications and tender documents. Panama has an administrative court to handle all public contracting disputes. The rulings of this administrative court are subject to review by Panama’s Supreme Court.

Many observers believe political interests are having a greater influence on procurement decisions. Panamanian business leaders have requested that sole-source contracting be used only on an exceptional basis, and U.S. firms have expressed concern about how the Government of Panama establishes and evaluates the criteria used to select a procurement winner. From January to September 2010, PanamaCompra adjudicated over $1.7 billion in over 75,000 contracts, of which $206 million in over 2,000 contracts were sole source. For the same period in 2011, PanamaCompra adjudicated 65,000 contracts valued at over $1.7 billion of which $208 million were sole source; between January 1 and April 15, 2011, the government of Panama procured approximately $32 million in goods and services through approximately 360 sole-source contracts, the majority of which the government justified on grounds of “urgency,” unique service or provider, or to benefit local interests.

There have been numerous news articles – in both Italy and Panama – about alleged corruption involving Italian company Finmeccanica, and the sole source purchase of radar equipment and helicopters for reportedly inflated prices. Separately, the Ministry of Economy and Finance reportedly canceled an almost $300 million loan agreement with the Compagnie Francaise D'Assurance Pour Le Commerce Exterieur (COFACE) after a dispute between the governments of Panama and France regarding Panama’s commitment to increasing tax transparency.
 
In other instances, U.S. companies have pointed to machinations that appear to favor one company in particular. Examples include extraordinary requirements for prior experience, exclusion of competing technologies through the use of specifications that appear lifted from one company’s brochure in particular, government resolutions that limit even private procurements of a certain technology, lengthy delays in ratification of a contract award that result in two-hour window or sole source procurements, and simply cancelling the procurement and reissuing it with little justification. U.S. companies have also alleged that Panamanian government officials may ask outright for payments to guarantee an award, or more indirectly may insist that they partner with a favored local firm.

Under the TPA, Panama’s procuring entities will be required to use fair and transparent procurement procedures, including advance notice of purchases and timely and effective bid review procedures, for procurement covered by the TPA. U.S. suppliers will be permitted to bid on procurement above certain thresholds of most Panamanian government entities, including key ministries and state-owned enterprises, on the same basis as Panamanian suppliers.

The TPA would also help to strengthen rule of law and fight corruption by requiring Panama to ensure under its domestic law that bribery in matters affecting trade and investment, including in government procurement, is treated as a criminal offense or is subject to non-criminal penalties where criminal responsibility is not applicable. While Panama committed to become a party to the WTO Government Procurement Agreement at the time it joined the WTO, to date, it remains an observer.

Currently, importing entities are required to hold a commercial or industrial license to operate in Panama, which can be obtained through Panama’s online business registration service [http://www.panamaemprende.gob.pa](www.panamaemprende.gob.pa). This website, in which a prospective business owner may register his or her business in 15 minutes, has reduced dramatically the number of opportunities for corruption from the former process which took 60 days and involved numerous interactions with local officials. Importing entities are not required to have a separate import license, with the exception of certain controlled products such as weapons, medicine, pharmaceutical products and certain chemicals.
