---
permalink: 'panama/investment-climate-in-panama-political-violence.html'
published: true
layout: default
---
The rupturing of the governing alliance in August 2011 has increased political tension in the country. Panama's Constitution provides for the right of peaceful assembly, and the Government generally respects this right. No authorization is needed for outdoor assembly, although prior notification for administrative purposes is required. Unions, student groups, employee associations, elected officials, and unaffiliated groups frequently attempt to impede traffic and commerce in order to force the government or business to agree to demands.

In June 2010, the President signed a new law, Law 30, which the National Assembly had approved rapidly behind closed doors. The controversial law revised several aspects of the Labor Code and eight other laws. Labor leaders, environmentalists, the media, and business groups opposed the law. In early July 2010, the Sitrabana union in the province of Bocas del Toro began a strike against Law 30. The strike and related protests turned violent as police intervened. Authorities acknowledged that at least two deaths were the result of police action in response to the strike/protest, and authorities initiated investigations into five other deaths. In the wake of the violence, the government agreed to pursue a formal process of dialogue with labor, businesses and civil society groups. The dialogue led to a series of revisions to Law 30 in October 2010, under which the law was divided into six individual bills with amended provisions acceptable to all the participants.

In early February 2011, the Government of Panama passed Law 8, which would have allowed foreign investment by allowing foreign government-owned companies or sovereign wealth fund equity investments to hold equity shares in mining concessions, among other amendments to the mining code. Indigenous, environmental, media, and student groups sought the revocation of the law through a concerted political campaign, which included daily protests and blocking of major roads and highways. The government repealed the law in March 2011.
