---
permalink: 'brazil/airports-opportunities.html'
published: true
layout: default
---
Brazil’s airport infrastructure upgrades present significant business opportunities for U.S. companies. In addition to providing design and consultancy services, products such as passenger bridges, docking systems, baggage handling systems, handling equipment, check-in conveyors, x-ray integration, baggage claim carousels, X-ray machines and other safety and security equipment are in demand by new concession winners. The Rio de Janeiro consortium, for example, is under a particularly tight deadline to prepare Galeão Airport for the 2016 Summer Olympic Games. Planned improvements scheduled for completion by April 2016 include the construction of 26 boarding bridges, increased cargo storage, construction of a parking lot for over 1,800 vehicles, and the adaption of track systems and patios for code F aircrafts. With the largest airspace of all major airports in Brazil, long-term plans for Galeão include the creation of a new runway and configuring large areas for retail space. Companies with know-how in the areas of airport management and operations are welcome to establish partnerships with local Brazilian companies, to participate in future privatization auctions. To be successful in Brazil, U.S. manufacturers must either be established in the country or have a well-informed local representative. Much like in other industry sectors in Brazil, it is important to have a representative, distributor or system integrator that can offer after sales and maintenance services, replacement parts and repairs.

Whether introducing a product to the market or entering the market with an existing local player, it is necessary to have a coherent market entry strategy to penetrate the Brazilian airport industry.
