---
permalink: 'brazil/selling-to-the-government.html'
published: true
layout: default
---
The Government of Brazil (GOB) is the nation’s largest buyer of goods and services. However, winning contracts with the government can be challenging. U.S. exporters may find themselves at a competitive disadvantage if they do not have a significant in-country presence – whether via established partnerships with Brazilian entities or some type of company subsidiary -- as well as the patience and financial resources to respond to legal challenges and bureaucratic delays. To be considered a local firm, that firm’s capital, decision-making authority, and operational control must be majority Brazilian-owned. Since the open period for bidding is often as short as one month, it is advisable to have a resident partner in Brazil.

Government procurement policies apply to purchases by government entities and “parastatal” companies such as Petrobras (i.e., quasi-governmental organization, corporation, business, or agency). Government procurement regulations contained in Bid Law 8666 establish an open and competitive process for major government procurements. Under this law, price is the overriding factor when selecting suppliers. Tenders are open for international competition, whether through direct bidding, consortia or imports. However, for many of the larger tenders (e.g. military purchases), single source procurements are possible if they are deemed to meet the national interest or provide unique technical requirements. In case of a bid tie, nationally owned companies will likely gain preference over foreign competitors. Recent measures are focused on modernizing the federal government’s tender process.

The Brazilian Constitution requires that all government purchases, whether at the federal, state or municipal levels, be contracted through public tenders. This process is regulated by Bid Law 8666, introduced in 1993. This law requires any and all official bidders to have a legal presence in Brazil. Law 8666 establishes general requirements for tenders and administrative contracts for goods and services at the Federal, State, and Municipal levels.

Brazil is not a signatory to the WTO Government Procurement Agreement, which precludes discrimination against goods and services from other signatory countries. Preferences for locally-produced products apply to government procurement at all levels, including federal, state and local. Federal and state tax exemptions were issued specifically for 2014 World Cup, and GOB also suspended some remedy actions on products that will be used during the games. Even with such exemptions now enacted, U.S. companies may find it difficult to participate in Brazil’s public sector procurement, unless they are associated with a local firm that can keep them informed of new procurements on short notice and that can assist with the preparation of required paperwork.

It is important to mention the Basic Production Program (PPB), which is an incentive program of the Ministry of Science and Technology and Ministry of Development, Industry in Foreign Trade for ICT products implemented in 1991. The program gives tax incentives to manufacture or assemble specific products within Free Trade Zones. PPB is well utilized by companies manufacturing cell phones and computers.

In 2010, then-President Lula signed a provisional measure that later was approved by the Congress and became law (No. 12,349, December 15, 2010), giving preference in public tenders to firms that produce in Brazil -- whether foreign-owned or Brazilian – and that fulfill certain economic stimulus requirements such as generating employment or contributing to technological development, even when their bids are up to 25 percent more expensive than competing, imported products. In August 2011, this system of preferences was folded into Plano Brasil Maior , the national industrial policy. Government procurement is just one of thirty-five components under Brasil Maior intended to support Brazilian exporters and protect domestic producers, particularly labor-intensive sectors threatened by exports from abroad. The textile, clothing and footwear industries – among the few industries to have lost jobs during the current growth period – were the first to benefit from Plano Brasil Maior when, in November 2011, the federal government’s Ministry of Development, Industry and Commerce (MDIC) implemented an 8 percent preference margin for Brazilian-made goods in these industries for those suppliers who bid on applicable government contracts. In April 2012, the government added pharmaceuticals and certain heavy construction equipment to the list of products receiving preference. In June 2012, the defense, education, and agriculture sectors also received preference margins. In 2012, US$4.2 billion was earmarked for government purchases of domestically-made products. Special legislation was also enacted for the purchase of local trucks, vans, and roads. In 2013, drills and ICT products received additional preference margins.

In order to stimulate innovation of national products, public institutions (when evaluating bids) can add margins of preference, which apply to the innovative component of a product developed in country and create a cost advantage for the domestic firm. The margins of preference of those products can reach up to 25 percent. Decree 7546/2011 established the requirements to obtain a national product designation, and the measures of industrial, commercial and technological compensation with the goal to strengthen the production of goods in country and technology development. In 2013, the Ministry of Science and Technology and Ministry of Development, Industry and Foreign Trade established the requirements for industrial and technological verifications for the additional margins of preference.

Decree 7174 (2010), which regulates the procurement of information technology goods and services, requires federal agencies and parastatal entities to give preferential treatment to locally produced computer products and goods or services with technology developed in Brazil, based upon a complex, price/technology matrix. However, Brazil permits foreign companies that have established legal entities in Brazil to compete for procurement-related contracts funded by multilateral development bank loans. In February 2013, Decree 7903 (2013) was issued, setting new preference margins for ICT products. Under the new guidelines, ICT products assembled in Brazil with imported component parts will have a 15% preference margin, while ICT products manufactured in Brazilian from local components will have a 25% preference.

The preference margins stipulated under Plano Brazil Maior are temporary and are set to expire between 2014 and 2015, depending on the sector. Government procurement is just one of thirty-five components under Plano Brazil Maior intended to support Brazilian exporters and protect domestic producers, particularly in the labor-intensive sectors.

Brazil is negotiating a treaty on government purchases under MERCOSUL, the Southern Common Market, comprised of Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, and Venezuela, which promotes free trade of goods, services, and production inputs. When the treaty is signed and ratified, Mercosul-produced goods will also be included in GOB preference margins on public purchases.

A Brazilian state enterprise is permitted to subcontract services to a foreign firm if domestic expertise is unavailable, while a foreign firm may only bid to provide technical services when there are no qualified Brazilian firms.

Including Brazilian goods and services in your company's bid, or subcontracting with a Brazilian firm, may improve your company’s chance for success. Similarly, a financing proposal that includes credit for the purchase of local goods and services for the project will be more attractive. Advance descriptions of U.S. suppliers' capabilities can prove influential in winning a contract, even when they are provided before the exact terms of an investment plan are defined or the project's specifications are fully defined. Such a proposal should include presentations on financing, engineering, equipment capabilities, training, and after-sale service that will originate and be carried out within Brazil.
