---
permalink: 'brazil/transparency-of-regulatory-system.html'
published: true
layout: default
---
In the 2013 World Bank “Doing Business” report, Brazil ranked 116th out of 189 countries in terms of overall ease of doing business, an improvement of fourteen places compared to the 2012 report (the 2012 report ranked four fewer countries). According to the study, it takes an average of 13 procedures and 107.5 days to start a new business, significantly longer than the OECD high-income economies’ average of 11.1 days. The study noted that the annual administrative burden to a medium-size business of tax payments in Brazil is an average of 2,600 hours versus 176 hours in the OECD high-income economies. According to this same study, the total tax rate for a medium- sized business in Brazil is 68.3 percent of profits, compared to 41.3 percent in the OECD high-income economies. Business managers often complain of not understanding tax regulations, despite their investments in large tax and accounting departments. Tax regulations, while burdensome and numerous, do not differentiate between foreign and domestic firms. However, there have been instances of complaints that the value-added tax collected by individual states (ICMS) favors local companies. Although the tax is designed to be refunded when goods are exported abroad, exporters in many states have had difficulty receiving their ICMS rebates. Taxes on commercial and financial transactions are particularly burdensome, and businesses complain that these taxes hinder the international competitiveness of Brazilian-made products.

Of Brazil’s ten federal regulatory agencies, the most prominent include ANVISA (the Brazilian equivalent of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration), which has regulatory authority over the production and marketing of food, drugs and medical devices; ANATEL, the country's telecommunication agency, which handles licensing and assigning of bandwidth; ANP, the National Petroleum Agency, which regulates oil and gas contracts and oversees the bidding process for oil blocks, including for pre-salt oil; and ANAC, the agency which oversees the civil aviation industry. In addition to these federal regulatory agencies, Brazil has 23 state-level agencies and eight municipal-level agencies.

The Office of the Presidency’s Program for the Strengthening of Institutional Capacity for Management in Regulation (PRO-REG), created in 2007, has tried to introduce a broad program for improving the regulatory framework in Brazil including via a 2014 Work Plan with the White House Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs to exchange best practices in developing regulations.

Pursuant to the Rousseff administration’s priority to improve transparency, the general public has online access to both approved and proposed federal legislation, via websites for the Chamber of Deputies, Federal Senate, and the Office of the Presidency. Brazil is seeking to improve their public comment and stakeholder input process.

Foreign investors have encountered obstacles engaging with regulatory agencies. Notable examples include companies in the electric power sector that have complained about the high level of regulatory risk, including the tariff review process. Additionally, some industries have reported challenges in obtaining licenses from IBAMA, the environmental regulator, citing unclear licensing requirements, though the process was reportedly streamlined in 2008. There have also been examples of federal agencies levying significant fines on U.S. companies.

Regulatory review of mergers and acquisitions are carried out by the Administrative Council for Economic Defense (CADE). In October 2012, Brazil performed its first-ever pre-merger review of a pending merger, bringing Brazil in line with U.S. and European practices. Brazil had previously performed only post -merger reviews. This shift in merger review was a result of 2011 legislation (Law 12529) which was adopted to modernize Brazil’s antitrust review and to combine the antitrust functions of the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Finance into those of the so-called Super CADE. This new government body will be responsible for enforcement of competition laws, consumer defense, and combating abuse of economic power.
