---
permalink: 'brazil/efficient-capital-markets.html'
published: true
layout: default
---
The Brazilian financial sector is large and sophisticated. Banks lend at Brazilian market rates which remain high. Reasons cited by industry observers include high taxation, repayment risk, concern over inconsistent judicial enforcement of contracts, high mandatory reserve requirements, and administrative overhead.

The financial sector is concentrated, with Central Bank data indicating that the 10 largest commercial banks (excluding brokerages) account for approximately 81 percent of the commercial banking sector’s roughly USD 2 trillion in assets. Three of the five largest banks (in assets) in the country, Banco do Brasil, Caixa Economica Federal, and BNDES, are partially or completely federally owned. Lending by the large banking institutions is focused on the largest companies, while small- and medium-sized banks primarily serve small- and medium-sized companies.

The Central Bank has strengthened bank audits, implemented more stringent internal control requirements, and tightened capital adequacy rules to better reflect risk. It also established loan classification and provisioning requirements. These measures are applied to private and publicly owned banks alike. The Brazilian securities and exchange commission (CVM) independently regulates the stock exchanges, brokers, distributors, pension funds, mutual funds, and leasing companies with penalties against insider trading.

Credit Market: Brazil’s credit market has grown significantly over the past several years. Real interest rates, once among the highest in the world, fell dramatically in 2012, driven by continued decreases in the Central Bank’s benchmark overnight Selic lending rate and a concerted effort by the GOB to reduce lending spreads charged by public and private banks. The Central Bank initiated a cycle of monetary policy tightening in April 2013, which has continued into 2014, and real interest rates have increased again. While local private sector banks are beginning to offer longer credit terms, BNDES, the state-owned national development bank, is the traditional Brazilian source of long-term credit, and also provides export credits. FINAME (the Special Agency for Industrial Financing) provides foreign- and domestically- owned companies operating in Brazil financing for the manufacturing and marketing of capital goods. FINAMEX (Export Financing), which finances capital good exports for both foreign and domestic companies, is a part of FINAME. One of the goals of these financing mechanisms is to encourage the purchase of domestically produced over imported equipment and machinery.

Equity Market: All stock trading is performed on the Sao Paulo Stock Exchange (BOVESPA), while trading of public securities is conducted on the Rio de Janeiro market. In 2008, the Brazilian Mercantile & Futures Exchange (BM&F) merged with the BOVESPA to form what is now the fourth largest exchange in the Western Hemisphere, after the NYSE, NASDAQ, and Canadian TSX Group exchanges. BOVESPA has launched a "New Market" in which the listed companies comply with stricter corporate governance requirements. A majority of initial public offerings (IPOs) are now listed on the New Market. Until October 2013, nine new IPOs and follow-ons raised R$ 16 billion in capital.

At the end of 2013, there were 452 companies traded on the BM&F/BOVESPA. Total daily trading average volume has risen from R$ 2.4 billion in 2006 to R$ 7.4 billion in 2013, and the number of trades has increased more than 10 times over the same period.

The BM&F/BOVESPA currently has no competition, but that may change soon. In January 2013, DirectEdge, the fourth-largest stock exchange operator in the United States, applied for a license to launch its services in Brazil in 2013. Direct Edge’s position in the Brazilian market may be strengthened after its proposed merger with BATS Global Markets in 2014. Direct Edge is expected to begin operations in Brazil in 2015.

Foreign investors, both institutions and individuals, can directly invest in equities, securities and derivatives. Foreign investors are required to trade derivatives and stocks of publicly held companies on established markets. At year-end 2013, foreign investors accounted for 43.7 percent of the total turnover on the BOVESPA. Domestic institutional investors were the second most active market participants, accounting for 32 percent of activity. Individual investors comprised 15.2 percent of activity, followed by financial institutions (7.4 percent), and public and private companies (1 percent). Law 10303 of 2001 limits preferred shares to 50 percent of new issuances.

Wholly owned subsidiaries of multinational accounting firms, including the major U.S. firms, are present in Brazil. As of 1996, auditors are personally liable for the accuracy of accounting statements prepared for banks.

In recent years the government has sought to manage short-term capital inflows and appreciation of the Brazilian currency with the introduction of new taxes on capital inflows (see “Conversion and Transfer Policies” in section 2).
